My research explores cities through three analytical lenses: urban geography, political ecology, and cultural landscapes. Urban geography – the most over-arching of these lenses – analyzes the broad political, economic, and cultural processes enabling urbanism and shaping urban outcomes. Within this nexus, political ecology highlights the interweaving of environmental systems and infrastructural networks in projects of political rule. Third, I use cultural landscape analysis to trace the ideological systems and symbolic meanings embedded within the physical environment to highlight the norms and expectations communicated through built forms.

I explore these three aspects of urban space from a critical, everyday, insurgent perspective. By critical, I mean I study these questions with an eye towards the political and ethical dilemmas – and not simply the physical traits or mechanistic procedures – by which urban landscapes are produced. By everyday, I mean I attend to the quotidian, often banal, yet absolutely fundamental needs, routines, and activities of residents – and not just global investors or privileged elites – as they go about the business of living and working in cities. By insurgent, I mean I highlight the way people use space in unintended ways, as well as the processes by which those unintended uses create generative friction that changes how cities built, managed, and interpreted.

In the two books and several articles I have written on these topics, my research confirms that processes of constructing and regulating cities are deeply embedded in inequitable power relationships. However, these publications also emphasize the importance of creative and subversive activism in transforming urban worlds. In other words, my scholarly work shows how smart, small-scale, tactical interventions by residents and small social groups – even those in marginalized or precarious circumstances – can push urbanization processes towards more socially and environmentally responsible outcomes. 

In my publications, I focus especially on the dynamics of critical, everyday, insurgent urbanism during key conjunctural moments, by which I mean the moments when the actions of individuals and small groups generatively intersect – and clash – with the political economic processes of global capital and transnational governance. I explore how and under what conditions these conjunctural collisions create more space for difference in cities – difference in social identity, cultural lifestyle, ecological diversity, and economic variety – difference that makes cities more inclusive, resilient, and engaging.

Publications
